---
title: "Harnessing Machine Learning for Predictive Analytics: A Case Study of Lassa Fever Outbreaks in Nigeria"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/lassa
excerpt: "In this project, I worked on building machine learning models to predict Lassa Fever outbreaks across Nigeria. Using epidemiological, socio-economic, and eco-climatic data, we were able to uncover patterns driving Lassa transmissions."
date: 2024-07-01
venue: "IEEE International Conference on Control, Decision and Information Technologies"
paperurl: "http://danielquezada.com/files/lassa.pdf"
citation: 'D. Quezada, S. Akwafuo, and S. Halyal, "Harnessing Machine Learning for Predictive Analytics: A Case Study of Lassa Fever Outbreaks in Nigeria" 2024 10th International Conference on Control, Decision and Information Technologies (CoDIT), Vallette, Malta, 2024, pp. 377-382, doi: 10.1109/CoDIT62066.2024.10708095.'
---

In the ongoing battle against global pandemics, understanding the key determinants that fuel outbreaks are of paramount importance. With this focus, our study aims to assess and rank the predictive capabilities of a wide range of socio-economic, eco-climatic, and spatiotemporal variables in predicting Lassa Fever (LF) outbreaks, using data from previous Nigerian outbreaks (2012-2019). Employing machine learning methods, particularly XGBoost and Random Forest, our study aims to offer accurate and robust predictions concerning LF incidence rates. As a crucial add-on, we leverage the innovative SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) technique as a post-processing tool to dissect and better understand the contributions of individual features towards the predictions generated by our machine learning models. This multi-layered approach allowed us to place a pronounced focus on healthcare infrastructure, population demographics, land cover, and other climatic covariates. Among the models evaluated, XGBoost performed the best; delivering an accuracy of 0.93, and AUC of 0.90, and an F1 score of 0.86 on 2018 data. For 2019 data, it maintained a strong accuracy of 0.90, an AUC of 0.89, and an F1 score of 0.75. Our SHAP analysis further emphasized precipitation seasonality, diagnostic center density, and land cover characteristics as pivotal influencers in predicting LF outbreaks. These findings shed light on the complex interplay between environmental conditions, urbanization, and healthcare infrastructure. Given these promising results, our work sets the stage for the development of an advanced early warning system for Lassa Fever in Nigeria: a system that could efficiently intertwine computational insights with on-ground interventions, ensuring timely and targeted responses to potential outbreaks.
